Let's go and talk about the top three
mistakes that I see students make when
using the unit circle. I'm going to go
over each of the mistakes, but then
offer some advice that you can use to
avoid making these mistakes on your own.
Now, spoiler tip, I've made these
mistakes, and I've also seen many, many
students make these exact same mistakes.
So, I know what to look out for, and
that's the way I want to approach this
video is showing you what the mistake
is, but then also showing you what to
look out for and what to make sure you
do instead. All right, so let's go and
talk about the first one. And this one's
pretty obvious, but again, ladies and
gentlemen, this happens all the time.
And it is just switching up your points
as well as angles. I'll just write up
points here because I think you'll
you'll get the idea. So, we know in the
unit circle there's kind of like really
two main points that students mix up,
right? We're not going to talk about the
square of two over two. I don't know why
I just said that because then that's
exactly what I wrote down. Uh we're not
going to talk about the square of two
over2, comma, square of 2 over2. Um, I
think everybody doesn't need to worry
about switching that one up. But what
about these two points? These two points
are eerily similar. It's the exact same
values. It's just they're switched up.
So we have square roo of three over two
comma 1/2 and 12 comma<unk> of 3 over
two. Now ladies and gentlemen, these
show up all over on the unit circle.
Yes, there's some pluses and some
minuses, but oh my god, how many times
do we know exactly what the answer is?
and maybe we're taking a test or maybe
we're doing our homework and we just
have that brain fart and we switch up
the points. It happens all the time.
What also happens all the time is
students switch up the angles. So
remember, you have like 30°, right? 45°
as well as 60°. Now later in this video,
I'm going to go over exactly how we use
these and how these are helpful on the
unit circle. But what happens all the
time is when we're dealing like with
radians in terms of pi over 6, pi over4,
as well as pi over 3, students will get
these mixed up. Now again it makes sense
right? You have a six here and you have
a six there. You have a three here and
you have a three there. So a lot of
times if people are given like a 30
degrees but they need to convert to
radians they'll think pi over 3. Or if
they have something in radians pi over 6
they immediately think 60° right? But
again just a quick thing to just
remember. We know ladies and gentlemen
that 30 degrees is less than 60 degrees.
Right? And we know that one over six is
less than one third. Right? If you have
like a candy bar and you break it up
into six parts, those parts are going to
be smaller than if you took a candy bar
and broke it up into three different
parts, right? So, make sure that you
just remember that or just always do a
quick little check because yes, the 30
30° is not equivalent to pi over 3,
right? It's equivalent to pi over 6. So,
make sure um that you have that. And
then again, to go through like the unit
circle, you need to know where these
points lie, right? And so what I'm going
to do is I'm going to graph the first
quadrant that you need to know. Now, all
students need to know this first
quadrant. And you need to have this
memorized. Now, if you don't have it
memorized, I'm going to give you a quick
little tip that you can use to go ahead
and have this memorized. Now, if we're
looking at our three angles, right? We
have 30, 45, 60. We know that 30° or pi
/ 6 is the smallest of the angles,
right? So, that has to be this one right
here. Then you have your middle one,
which is your 45 or pi over4. And then
you have the larger angle which is 60
degrees or pi over 6. Now, how do you
remember these points? Because again, if
you're quick um switching them up, a lot
of times it'll just be, you know, you
just do a mental fart like with 30 and
pi over 3 or other times you just don't
remember like where do these points go?
That's why it's so important to remember
the unit circle. But and more
importantly than memorizing the unit
circle, what I always tell my students
is to practice. You have to practice
doing this. And what I have is I
actually have a worksheet um that I'll
put down below that helps you go over
the unit circle. And my promise to you
is if you do this worksheet that just is
about evaluating points on the unit
circle. It's a lot of problems, but I'm
telling you, you go through it, you're
not going to have to worry about
remembering where these points are on
the unit in circle. So, I'll have that
link down below um if you're interested
in it. And it's one of the things that I
gave my students every single year
because students just didn't get enough
practice. And when you don't get enough
practice, you start making these
mistakes. Okay, so let's go through how
to find these points. Now, the cool
thing about these points is you could
use like there's videos on like the hand
rule and I didn't never really liked um
all that kind of stuff. I I don't know.
I just I told my students that we know
each of these points in the first
quadrant of the unit circle are all
fractions. And what I always just told
them was just 1 2 3 1 2 3 All right. So
the numerator it's always square root of
one square of two square of three. Then
on the way down it's square<unk> of 1
square<unk> of two square roo of three
and then the cool thing is everything is
divided by two. So you can just put a
two in the denominator for all these.
Now do you need to write square<unk> of
1? No, you can just write a one there.
Right? So that's why these points and
actually let me move this down so I can
rewrite these. Let's see if I can
capture everything. Hopefully didn't
give myself enough room. Yes. Okay. So
let's go ahead and rewrite these um just
in red. Just a little bit bigger. So
this is of 3 over two comma 12. This is
obviously the square of two over2.
Hopefully you got that one. And then
this one is 12 comma 3 over two. Now
again ladies and gentlemen memorize
these or do the practice in the practice
problems that I provide you um over and
over and over. So therefore this first
quadrant of the unit circle you have
like the back of your hand, right? That
is how important this needs to be. And
so many mistakes can be avoided with you
just having a firm grasp of your first
quadrant because the next mistake that
students will make is once they know the
first quadrant, they're like, "All
right, I kind of memorized that or I've
done enough examples of that. Now, what
I'm going to do is I just want to
memorize all of the quadrants." And my
advice to you is if your teacher is
telling you to memorize all the
quadrants, run. Well, I know you can't
run, right? because you're stuck in the
class. But either way, I I do not
approve that you need to memorize the
every quadrant of the unit circle. First
quadrant, yes, you need to you need to
know that. All the other quadrants, no,
ladies and gentlemen, like if you've
ever created an activity where you write
in all the points of of the unit circle,
you start to see patterns, right? And
that's something very very important.
And I don't have a problem with that,
you know, activity because I used to do
it as well for my students. But to think
that you're going to try to memorize all
those points on that unit circle, you're
just going to forget it. Um, you know,
the main important thing is to know the
first quadrant and then also to know
this next thing, which is going to be
reference angles. Okay, so what I'm
about to do is I'm just going to go
through a quick little process the way
that I showed my students and really all
you need to know to be able to find the
point on any unit circle. Okay. So, do
not try to think you can memorize unit
circle because again what comes up in
the next mistake as well as when you
have negative angles it confuses you and
you'll you'll end up making mistakes.
So, I don't want you to do that. What I
want you to know is what is the
reference angle? Now, what is the
definition of a reference angle? The
reference angle is the acute
positive angle between your terminal
side of your angle and the x-axis. This
probably sounds confusing, but that's
kind of the mathematical way. So, let's
go through an angle. What if I gave you
an angle theta equals 5<unk>i over 4?
Okay, now if you're thinking about that
in terms of degrees, that's going to be
225 degrees. But let's go and graph
this. Hopefully, you have a good idea of
how to graph angles. So, you know, all
right, we're on the x- axis, right? We
know we're going to go halfway around
the circle. And if you were to break
that, we know that's pi, right? which in
terms of um four or in terms of force,
we could write that as 4 pi over4,
right? We could break that into four
extra sections. And then so if we're at
5 pi over 4, that's just going to be an
extra section right here. Okay? Now,
here's where the reference angle comes
in. The reference angle again is this.
Why won't you select this? There you go.
The reference angle is the acute
positive angle between the terminal side
and the x-axis. Now, again, remember
each of these sections is pi over4,
right? We know halfway around a circle
is pi. all the way around is 2 pi. So
this is broken up into four equal
sections. Each one's pi over 4, 2 pi
over 4, 3 pi over 4, 4 pi over 4. But
each of these little sections is pi
over4. The angle, right? Now this is
that reference angle. This is pi over4.
Here's the cool part. This point right
here is equivalent to pi over4 on your
first quadrant. Right? The values, the
points are exactly the same. The only
difference is going to be the positive
and the negatives because we know
anything in the first quadrant is always
positive positive right the x and the y
uh x and y coordinate are positive
positive second quadrant my x coordinate
is negative my y-coordinate is positive
third quadrant everything is negative
the x and the y coordinates and then
fourth quadrant we have a positive x but
we have a negative y-coordinate okay so
if I graph an angle again it doesn't
matter if it doesn't matter if it's 7 pi
over 3 it doesn't matter if it's um
5 pi over 6 like whatever graph the
angle identify what the reference angle
is. Now it's important to note it. It's
important to note that if you have a
point that is on the axis then those are
not going to those are not going to have
reference angles. So you just need to
remember these coordinate points right
you have you just need to know what
these points are and know which axis it
lies on. So just a quick review because
I don't know I'm a teacher so I'm just
adding in this in you need to make sure
you know this stuff. Okay. Um, and then
this one is going to be what is this? 0
comma negative 1. Now, a important
little tip, guys. The reference angle is
always just going to be a subset of
whatever that angle is. Typically, not
always, but typically if you're going to
have like, for instance, so here my
reference angle is pi over4.
What do I say? 7 pi over 3. So if I give
you like theta equals 7 pi over 3, the
reference angle is going to equal a pi
over 3. We always put this little mark
there. And then what was I said like 5
pi over 6. So if you have like theta
equals 5 pi over 6 and again you can
graph these and verify this. The
reference angle is going to be at pi /
6. Okay. Now this is really important
because if I look and I want to graph
like or I want to know what exactly
those points are. So I have 5 pi or 4.
Now again knowing that I have this
memorized pi over4 has a coordinate
point of 2 over2 comma2 over2 but I know
that 5<unk>4 is in the second or in the
third quadrant. So now I know that this
coordinate point that this relates to is
going to be a negative 2 over two comma
a2
over2. I didn't try to visualize what
the unit circle was and all those points
there. All I need to focus on looking at
my angle telling me from knowing what
that angle is, telling me what quadrants
it is in as well as what is going to be
the reference angle. Once I know the
reference angle, I go to my first
quadrant, which I know all those points
because I did the practice in this video
as well as I I have memorized it. So,
and then I just make sure I use the same
points, but then I apply the correct
positive and negative. And that's all
you guys need to know. Don't waste your
time trying to memorize the unit circle.
But um which goes into the last one
where students will make mistakes on the
unit circle and especially when they try
to memorize is when we start giving them
angles where they need to use period as
an aid or the other thing which is
co-terminal
angles. Now a lot of times when we're
first learning trig or the unit circle
our teacher will give us problems on
co-terminal angles and reference angles
but we don't actually apply how they're
being used and sometimes it's a busy
work and some and students will not take
it seriously. But ladies and gentlemen,
being able to use I already showed you
why using reference angle was so
important. Co-terminal angles is just as
important, right? A lot of students
would memorize the unit circle. And then
I'd say, okay, cool. You've memorized
the unit circle, right? So what what is
the point that corresponds to 7 pi over
3? And they're like, that's not on the
unit circle. And I'm like, you're right.
It's not on the unit circle, but you
need to know how to graph this. Okay.
And so sometimes it would get confusing
to them and they would be like, "Well,
how am I going to go and do this?" You
know, they'd say, "All right, that's pi
or 6 pi or 6 pi over 3 or 3 pi over 3.
That would be 6 pi over 3." And they're
like, "Okay." And they graph it and
they're like, "Okay, now I got over
here." Now, again, what is this
reference angle? The reference angle in
this case is simply just going to be a
pi over 3.
Pi uh equals a pi over 3. So, and we
also recognize that it's in the first
quadrant. I know that pi um pi over 3
has the coordinate point of 1/2 comma of
3 over2. Go back to the video if I'm not
if you're don't check my work. Um so
therefore this coordinate point that
corresponds to this angle is going to be
uh 12 comma 3 over2. Now if you
understand co-terminal angles because
co-terminal angles
um is going to represent the exact same
point here as your um as if you just had
the angle pi over 3 in this reference
angle. Okay. But what you can also do
with co-terminal angles or what we like
what I like to do is explain is use
period as an aid. So rather than looking
or to say that 7 pi over 3 and pi over 3
are what we say co-terminal angles. So
um another thing is use period as an
aid. So if I gave you uh 7 pi over 3,
what I want you to be able to do is can
you rewrite 7 pi over 3 with a as an
addition statement with a revolution?
Because when I go all the way around a
circle like that, it's not really
changing the problem. That's just me
going all the way around the circle,
right? So I can rewrite this as one
revolution, which is 6 pi over 3 plus a
pi over 3. Then ladies and gentlemen, if
I'm just trying to identify where is the
point on the unit circle, I don't care
about going around the circle that one
time, right? So I can just disregard the
6 pi over 3 and rewrite it as pi over 3.
Or not rewrite as pi over 3, but just
focus on finding the point at pi over 3.
Now, let's go over to a mistake though
that students will make with this. And
again, let's do one that's a little bit
more difficult. What if I gave you theta
equals a5
pi / 2. Now, again, this one, I've seen
students graph this so many times. They
just go around the circle. It's a
negative direction. They keep on going
around and around and it's waste of
time. Think about using period as an
aid. Okay. So, what I can do is make
sure you have a negative outside the
brackets. Now let's go ahead and write
um write them with revolutions. So a
revolution would be 2 pi or equivalent 4
pi over 2. So I can say that's going to
be 4 pi over 2 plus 4<unk>i / 2 which is
8 p<unk> / 2 plus another 4 pi over 2
which is 12 p<unk> / 2 plus a 3 pi over
2. So again let's knock out our
revolutions. Right? We don't need these.
These are just rotations, right? Just
going around and around and around. So
forget about those because5
pi /2 is going to be a co-terminal angle
with a negative 3 pi / 2. These are what
we call co-terminal angles. Now let's
see if we can remember what exactly is a
-3 pi / 2. And if you think about this,
let's go back to our graphing practice.
I guess I can put it right here. Okay,
so we go in the negative direction. This
is pi. So that's pi half. So 1/2, two
halves, three halves. So pi 2 is right
there. Again, this part here of this
point, and again, I showed you up here
what it was. It's 0 comma 1. So the
coordinate point that corresponds to
this is going to be a 0 comma 1. So
again, ladies and gentlemen, if you need
some more practice with um the unit
circle, go and check out the practice
worksheet I have down below. I'm telling
you, you go through that just one time,
maybe a couple times, and you will never
have to worry about the unit circle
again. But if you are looking for some
more videos that I do have on the unit
circle or even just some common mistakes
that I see students make in math, then
go and check out the next video I have
for you here or check out the playlist I
have for you down below. Chest.